Welcome my friend to
today's lecture on tense.
Ever felt like your
brain needed a power up?
This is it.
Concept.
Explanation.
So what exactly is tense you ask?
Well, it's like the.
Time traveler of grammar, a
category that cleverly expresses
when something happened.
It's used to indicate if an action
took place in the past is happening
now or will unfold in the future.
In the beautiful chaos of English
verbs are action heroes actually
change their form to perfectly align
with these differents grasping tenses.
Isn't just about passing your exam.
It's absolutely crucial for building
sentences that make sense for
understanding the precise timing
of events in any text you read.
And ultimately, for truly effective
communication, it's like having a
super power to convey exact meaning.
Isn't it?
Now, broadly speaking, we have three main
tenses in English, just like your everyday
traffic lights, past, present, and future.
But hold on, it gets more interesting.
Each of these main tenses
isn't just a single light.
It's further divided into
four distinct aspects.
Simple, continuous, also
known as progressive.
For those who like fancy words.
Perfect and perfect continuous.
If you do the math, that gives us a grand
total of 12 common verb tenses in English.
Each one has its own special purpose and
a unique form, like different spices in a.
Perfect curry.
Lemme give you a quick taste.
The simple present is your go-to
for habits, daily routines.
Universal facts and general truths.
For instance, she walks
to school every day.
Simple, effective, like your morning chai.
Then we have the present continuous,
which is for actions happening right now
as we speak, all for temporary situations
like he is reading a book right now.
Bet he is.
Next up the present.
Perfect.
This one is for actions that
began in the past but are still
continuing up to the present or
actions completed in the past, but.
Clear result.
That's still relevant.
Now.
Think of it as linking
the past to the present.
For example, they have lived here for
five years and finally the present perfect
continuous, this busy tense is for actions
that started way back, continued right
up to the present moment and are either
still going on or have just just finished.
Like when you say she has
been studying for three hours.
Pew.
That's some serious
dedication, and don't worry.
Similar patterns beautifully apply
to the past and future tenses
too, giving us all the tools for a
truly nuanced expression of time.
In English, it's like having a f. Full
palette of colors to paint your sentences.
Real world relevance.
Why is understanding tenses so important,
especially for our aspiring officers?
Well, my friends, it's not just academic.
It's absolutely crucial for you to
accurately interpret those intricate
financial documents to communicate with.
Crystal clarity with clients, making
sure there's no misunderstanding, and
of course to report precise timelines
in all their official correspondence.
Imagine misplacing a zero in finance.
Equally bad is misplacing
an action in time.
Breakdown of question types.
Now let's talk about the exam,
because that's why we are here, right?
Based on past patterns in your exam.
Questions related to tenses mostly
pop up in a few common formats.
Roughly 40% of the time you'll see
them in error spotting questions here,
your job is to find the grammatical
mistake in sentences, and often it's
related to a wrong tense usage or a
subject word agreement Gone rogue.
Then about 30% of the questions fall
under sentence improvement or correction.
This is where you replace an
underlined part of a sentence with
a more grammatically sound option.
And yes, tense corrections
are a frequent player.
Here, about 20% are fill in the
blanks questions where you need to
pick the perfect verb form or tense
to complete a sentence meaningfully.
And finally around 10% will be enclosed.
Tests where you have multiple blanks in
a passage and understanding the context
and the right tense is absolutely vital
for the whole passage to make sense.
So quite the spread,
just like a good buffet.
Formulas and tricks.
Let's get down to some formulas.
Easy peasy, lemon squeezy.
For the present, simple, it's
subject plus V one with an S or
E. S for third person, singular.
For example, he plays C.
The present continuous uses.
Subject plus is R plus VING.
Like he is playing for present.
Perfect.
It's Subject Plus has have plus
V three as in he has played and
for present Perfect continuous.
We have Subject Plus has
have Plus been plus VING.
So he has been playing,
moving to the past.
Simple Past is just subject plus V two.
He played past continuous is
Subject plus was were plus VING.
He was playing past Perfect Takes
Subject plus hat plus V three.
He had played and past Perfect.
Continuous is Subject plus hat,
plus bin plus VING example.
He had been playing.
Finally for the future Simple, it's
Subject Plus Will Shall Plus V one.
He will play Future continuous Uses
Subject Plus Will Shall plus B plus VING.
He will be playing Future Perfect is
Subject Plus Will Shall plus half plus
V three, he will have played and Future
Perfect continuous is subject plus Will
Shall plus half plus Bin plus VING.
So he will have been playing.
Now for a quick trick, friends, always
keep an eye out for those time indicators.
Words like always yesterday,
tomorrow, since or four, are like
secret codes that quickly tell you
which tense is calling the shots.
Methods of solving.
When you are tackling tense related
questions, a systematic approach
can seriously boost your accuracy.
First, always identify the verb.
Pinpoint the main verb or verbs
in that sentence or passage.
Second, look for time indicators.
Search for those helpful adverbs
of time, you know, now, yesterday,
tomorrow, always, often,
never since for already yet.
Just or look for time
clauses like when, while.
As soon as before, after, these
are your golden clues about when
the action is actually happening.
Third, analyze context.
This is where you become a detective.
Try to understand the overall meaning
and the exact sequence of events in the
sentence or the sentences around it.
This helps you figure out if an action
is ongoing, completed, a regular habit,
or something planned for the future.
Fourth check for agreement.
Always ensure your verb tense
plays nicely with the subject
in terms of number and person.
And if there are multiple actions,
make sure the tenses are consistent.
Fifth, consider conditional sentences.
If you spot an if clause, remember
the specific rules for tenses
in those conditional sentences.
For instance, in a type one
conditional, it's if plus simple
present, then will plus V one.
Simple as that.
And finally, review reported speech
rules if direct speech gets converted
into reported speech, don't forget that.
Typical back shift of
tenses that usually occurs.
This systematic approach is
your GPS for tense questions,
shortcuts and smart techniques.
All right, friends, let's talk about
some smart techniques and shortcuts that
can make your life easier in the exam.
First up, the elimination strategy
in multiple choice questions.
Even if you are not a hundred percent sure
of the correct tense, quickly kick out
the options that are clearly grammatically
incorrect or just don't fit the context.
This narrows down your choices like magic.
Then there's keyword association.
Train your brain to link specific
keywords directly with certain tenses.
For example ago, usually screams simple
past yet or already often whisper.
Present.
Perfect.
And while that's usually a
friend of continuous tenses.
Next, always do a parallelism check when
you are dealing with sentences that have
multiple clauses or a list of actions.
Make sure your tenses are parallel
unless there's a very clear and
logical reason for a time shift.
Fourth practice with timed exercises.
Just like a cricketer practices in
the nets regularly, solving tense
questions under timed conditions will
significantly improve your speed and
accuracy, getting you ready for exam
pressure, and finally focus on verb forms.
This is super important.
Memorize the V one, V two and V
three forms of common irregular
verbs because these little rascals
are very frequent sources of errors
when it comes to tense usage.
Don't let them trick you.
Common mistakes and misconceptions.
Now, let's talk about those sneaky
common mistakes and misconceptions
that friends often fall prey to
First using an incorrect verb form.
This is like saying Go when.
You should have said Gone for perfect
tenses, especially with irregular verbs.
Watch out.
Second subject verb agreement issues.
Mismatching the verb with the
subject in terms of singular
or plural is a classic error.
Remember, he go is incorrect.
It should be.
He goes simple but often missed.
Third overuse of present.
Perfect.
People sometimes use the present,
perfect for actions that have a
definite specific pastime reference.
For instance, I have seen
him yesterday is a big no-no.
It should be.
I saw him yesterday.
Fourth, confusion between
simple, past and present.
Perfect.
The simple past is for actions completed
at a specific time in the past.
The present, perfect.
However, is for actions that started in
the past and continue to the present or
have a result that's still relevant now.
They are not interchangeable.
Okay.
Fifth misuse of continuous tenses.
Don't use continuous tenses for states
or habits that are not ongoing actions.
For example, I am knowing him.
Sounds a bit off, doesn't it?
It should simply be.
I know him.
Sext incorrect, conditional tense usage.
Mixing up tenses in conditional
sentences is a common blunder.
The infamous, if I would have
known, I would have told you,
is grammatically incorrect.
The correct form is.
If I had known, I would have told you.
And finally, a lack of parallelism.
Not keeping the tenses consistent
across parallel clauses or actions
within the same sentence, can make
your writing sound disjointed.
Keep it smooth and
parallel like train tracks.
W Edge Framework summary.
Let's quickly summarize
everything we've discussed using
our simple W Edge framework.
So what is tense?
It simply defines the time and action
occurs, be it past, present, or future.
Next, why do we need it?
It's absolutely essential for
clear communication, for accurate
reporting, and for understanding
the precise timelines of events.
When do we use it or when is it applied?
It's applied in all forms of communication
to specify the exact timing of actions
and where is it used everywhere.
My friend, in our daily conversations,
in academic writing, in professional
documents, and of course in
all competitive exams, then who
benefits from understanding it?
Literally everyone who uses English
benefits immensely from understanding
and applying tenses correctly.
And finally, how does it work through
specific verb forms and auxiliary
verbs that brilliantly indicate both
the time and the aspect of an action?
Simple, isn't it fully
worked out examples.
Now let's tackle some
fully worked out examples.
Time to put our knowledge
to the test, shall we?
Example, one question.
Identify the part of the
sentence that contains an error.
She, A, has been working on
this project B since five R,
and she C is still not finished.
D, no error.
Options A has been working B since five.
Rs.
C is still not finished.
D, no error.
Understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Solution, step one.
First, we need to analyze the sentence
for any telltale time indicators.
The phrase, since fivers
immediately jumps out, right?
This indicates a duration of time.
And the verb has been working is clearly
in the present, perfect continuous
tense, which as we discussed, is
perfectly used for actions that started
in the past and are still continuing
right up to the present moment.
Step two.
Now, let's recall the proper usage
of since and form, remember, since
is typically used to point to a
specific starting point in time.
For example, since 2010 or since Monday.
On the other hand, four is what we
use to express a duration of time,
like for five hours or for two weeks.
Step three.
So let's identify the error.
Since five R specifies a duration, the
correct preposition we should use here is
four, not since, therefore, the error is
quite clearly in part B, correct sentence.
She has been working on this project for
five R and she is still not finished.
Correct?
Answer is option B. This is
a classic one, so watch out.
Example two question.
Choose the most appropriate
option to complete the sentence
by the time we reach the station.
The train.
Dash options A leaves B has left, C.
Had left d. Will leave.
Understand the question
before moving to explanation.
Solution.
Step one.
The very first thing to do here is
to understand the sequence of events.
We have two past actions described.
We reach the station
and the train leaving.
The phrase by the time we reach
the station is a huge hint.
It clearly indicates that the
train's departure happened before
our arrival at the station.
This is like missing your ride.
Step two.
Now let's apply the golden rule
for past actions in sequence when
you have two actions that both
occurred in the past and one of them
happened even earlier than the other.
The earlier action is
always expressed in the.
Past perfect tense, which
is hat plus we three.
The later action, the one that happens.
Second is expressed in the
simple past tense step three.
So let's determine the correct
tense for the train's departure.
Since the train leaving is the action
that occurred first or earlier than our
arrival, it absolutely must be in the
past perfect tense, correct sentence.
By the time we reached the
station, the train had left.
Correct answer is option C. No
point crying over spilled milk,
or in this case a departed train.
Example three question.
Select the sentence that
is grammatically correct.
A. If I would have known,
I would have told you.
B. If I had known, I would have told you.
C. If I knew I would have told you.
D. If I have known, I would have told
you understand the question before.
Moving to explanation.
Solution, step one.
First, let's identify the type of
conditional sentence we are dealing with.
Look at the main clause.
I would have told you this uses the
structure would have plus we three,
which is a classic characteristic of
a type three conditional sentence.
Remember?
Type three conditioners are
used to discuss hypothetical
situations in the past and their
hypothetical results, things that
could have happened but didn't.
Step two.
Now, let's recall the precise structure
of type three conditional sentences.
The correct structure for this type is if
plus past perfect that's had plus we three
followed by would have plus we three.
Keep this formula in mind.
It's your secret weapon for conditionals.
Step three.
Finally, let's evaluate each option based
on a type three conditional structure.
A if I would have known.
Is incorrect my friends.
The IF clause in a type three conditional
must use the past perfect tense, not
would have B if I had known correctly,
uses the past perfect tense in the if
clause, which perfectly matches the
type three structure we just discussed.
This one looks promising.
C, if I knew, uses the simple past tense.
This structure if plus simple past
would plus V. One is actually for
type two conditionals, which talk
about hypothetical situations in
the present or future not the past.
So incorrect here.
D if I have known, uses the
present perfect tense, which is
also incorrect for this specific
conditional type correct sentence.
If I had known, I would have told you
correct answer is option B. Spot on.
Just like a
thank you.